You were born John, the second child of six, raised in a leaky shack behind an abbatoir. You were born inclined to suffer from severe headaches, morbidness, melancholy, and a tendency for inflammation, especially at the base of the head. While you developed some driving ability in youth, it only helped accelerate your descent into crime and debauchery, culminating in the attempted burglary of a Academician. You were seized by constables and in a daring attempted escape through both sewer and forest, your misadventure ended when you were set upon by a wild anaconda and left to bleed out in a billiard room where you had attempted to take refuge.

Your loving mother named you John at birth, an adored only child. You possessed the overflowing of the higher passions producing an exquisite tenderness, a strong love for all that is grand, noble, and beautiful. Your grandfather, a Academician, set you up for success in life with both scholastic and material support. However your fortune was forclosed, your happiness a temptation to hubris that enraged the fates, and you died of severe mouth papules brought on by Argentine hemorrhagic fever contracted after cutting a finger with a rusty knife while peeling potatoes. 

You were named John by the attendant nun who accepted you at the doorstep of the workhouse. were born with an anaemic condition of the blood that affects the brain, a low condition of vitality and bad circulation, which seems to starve the brain of blood preventing you from making any continuous effort in regard to study or will power, and causing you to act in an erratic fashion. In early life you managed to find work as underling to a Advocate Deputy but it was clear you made them apprehensive whenever you were in sight, and your duties were kept confined to a mostly disused auditorium, working late into the night alone. Your indistinctness and mechanical empathy failed to distinguish you in your employer's eyes and no one noticed when you began to develop mild encephalitis. After years of neglect, you finally passed from your malady, alone in your appalling auditorium. 

Your name was John, the third son of the small family of a successful Advocate Deputy. You were brave and daring. However, life is imperiled when the head and heart are governed and controlled by the blind operation of the vital instinct. While you excelled in your early studies, developing a respectable driving ability, you were reckless in all matters of love, shunned by all you approached. You became bilious over the years, and scorned all frendly contact, shut away in a basement, ashamed. One day after feeling you had been slighted on the street by a character of some renown, Ambassador Phillips, you shoved the Ambassador and shouted maladictions. The Ambassador challenged you to a duel by sabre, and the following morning at dawn you sustained a grevious wound to the belly. It took four days for you to succumb to your wounds, and your then estranged family was not there to mourn your passing, due to years of bad blood and unwritten letters home. 

You met life as John, a blissful, bouncy baby. You had a heart that was a crucible, where the ore is converted into gold. Even at a young age you showed great hug strength and singing ability. You quickly found your way into an apprenticeship under the famed Baron Arntzen, and you took to heart the speech he gave to the society of philosophers and physiognomists, "There is no security against the ultimate development of mechanical consciousness, in the fact of machines possessing little consciousness now. A mollusc has not much consciousness. Reflect upon the extraordinary advance which machines have made during the last few hundred years, and note how slowly the animal and vegetable kingdoms are advancing. The more highly organised machines are creatures not so much of yesterday, as of the last five minutes, so to speak, in comparison with past time. Assume for the sake of argument that conscious beings have existed for some twenty million years: see what strides machines have made in the last thousand! May not the world last twenty million years longer? If so, what will they not in the end become? Is it not safer to nip the mischief in the bud and to forbid them further progress?\nBut who can say that the robot has not a kind of consciousness? Where does consciousness begin, and where end? Who can draw the line? Who can draw any line? Is not everything interwoven with everything? Is not machinery linked with humanity in an infinite variety of ways?\n." But it was under the Baron's employ that you met your fate. In your ambition to grow as great in learning and stature as the Baron, you tampered with forces beyond your understanding. Invocations of a weird ghost did grant you visions of forbidden knowledge, but also darkened your soul and soured your health. Avoiding sunlight and fresh air and taking instead to the backalley and underground laboratory, you soon contracted Brazilian hemorrhagic fever from your unconventional, atrocious experiments. The Baron tried to intervene, but you died riddled with bilious muscle cramps.
