---
tite: "Air War College Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Applied to Executive Leadership"
url: "https://archive.org/details/DTIC_ADA288435"
---

Myers-Briggs Type Indicator Applied to Executive Leadership 
The Air War College ( AWC)-initiated an executive asressment and development program in 1982. The purpose of the newly initiated program was to strengthen and expand the leadership skills necessary for AWC students to better direct complex organizations upon graduation. During a 1986 AWC curriculum review Major General Todd, Commandant of the Air War College, stated the time had come to expand the executive assessment and development program, beyond a health evaluation and assess the students' personality types to provide them new insights into effective leadership. This project consists of not only the seminar and reading materials that enable the AWC to teach the Myers-Briggs lype Indicator applied to executive leadership, but also the instructional system development (ISD) documentation that substantiates both the need for and the composition of the course. 

discovered a clear connection between certain preference dimensions that could explain behavior, something the MBTI does not (4:31). Keirsey and Batoj called these related dimensions the four temperaments. A temperament being "that which places a signature or thumbprint on each of one’s actions, making it recognizably ones own", i.e., their behavior (4:27). In terms of the preference dimensions, the four temperaments are defined as follows: NF; NT; SP; and SJ (4:30). Attachment 1 to Appendix A contains a succinct summary of the four temperament types. A careful reading of this summary is essential to get an idea for how others around us feel and why they act the way they do. 

Personality typing first emerged as a concept in Katharine Briggs' mind around the time of World War I. Briggs was a gifted thinker and reader who began to question and observe the differences and similarities of personality types. Although not formally schooled in the study of psychology, Briggs developed a system of personality typing based on the results of her observations. Shortly thereafter she discovered C.G. Jung, a Swiss physician and psychologist, had theorized a similar system. With this newfound information Briggs began to expand the theoretical system she shared with Jung. She continued to theorize about personality types, but it was her daughter, Isabel Briggs-Myers, who put the theory to use 

The MBTI was given to all students in the Air War College class of 1987 in early August 1986. The indicators were evaluated and a general lecture period discussing the students’ MBTI results was held a few weeks after the test. The students have tried to use their results on a personal basis but have not received further formal instruction on the possible uses of the MBTI applied to executive leadership. The AWC conducted a seminar on 7 January 1987 using a draft of the lesson materials developed by this project. The lesson content was subsequently revised and refined, and appears at Appendix A in final form.

Extraversion(E) versus Introversion(I) 
Sensing(S) versus Intuition(N) 
Thinking(T) versus Feeling(F) 
Perception(P) versus Judgment(J) 

Sensing and Intuition Characteristics 

SENSING 
INTUITION 

Population: 70% 

Population: 30% 

To perceive data Sensors prefer: 
Digital; here and now; 
sequential and factual information; 
practical.

Summary: They are doers and 
are very literal. 

To perceive data Intuitors prefer: 
Analogue; possibilities and related hunches; 
theoretical meanings of data. 

Summary: They teach doers and are 
are big picture people.

As previously mentioned, once the data is perceived it must be processed in order to arrive at a conclusion. This is the judging function of our personality. Again, there are two different ways in which we judge data. The first way is by thinking and the second way is by feeling. People who prefer to judge data by thinking "...aim to make logical, impersonal decisions based on cause and effect." On the other hand, people who prefer to judge data by feeling "...aim to make their decisions in accord with what matters most to them personally and to other people (not necessarily known to them) for whom they feel." Table 3 summarizes some of the characteristics of the two ways of judging, thinking and feeling. 

THINKING 
Population: 50% 
To make a judgment thinkers prefer: 
Clarity; 
objective values; 
non-personal; 
analytical; 
process; 
weighs cause and effect 

FEELING 
Population: 50% 
To make a judgment feelers prefer: 
Harmony; 
subjective values; 
interpersonal relationships; 
weighs impact on self and 
others. 

Table 3; 
Thinking and Feeling Characteristics 

The next step in comprehending the theory behind the MBTI is to explore "the 
world" in which we prefer to perform either the perceiving or judging function. 
If we prefer to operate in the outer world we are extraverts and if we prefer 
the inner world we are introverts. 
Table 4 summarizes the characteristics of "the world" in which we prefer to operate. 

EXTRAVERSION 
Population: 75% 
Extraverts prefer: Outer 
world people; 
action people; 
open disclosure; many 
relationships. 

INTROVERSION 
Population; 25% 
Introverts prefer: 
Inner world thoughts and ideas; 
cautious disclosure; 
fewer relationships. 

Table 4: Extraversion and Introversion Characteristics 


The final dimension in the MBTI demonstrates the way we share our preference 
type with the people around us, i.e., do we prefer to share our perceptions or 
our judgments. Isabel Briggs-Myers expanded on this last dimension; 

Judging types face the world with their favored judging process, 
thinking or feeling as the case may be. They tend to live in a 
planned, decided, orderly way, aiming to regulate life and control 
it. Perceptive types deal with people and things with their favored 
perceptive process, sensing or intuition as the case may be. They 
tend to live in a flexible, spontaneous way, aiming to understand 
life and adapt to it." 

Table 5 summarizes the characteristics of the ways in which people prefer to 
interact with the outer world, judging or perceiving. 

JUDGING 
Population: 50% 
They are the organizers who 
prefer: To be structured; 
scheduled; ordered; control- 
led; planned; use lists. 

PERCEIVING 
Population: 50% 
They are open ended and 
prefer; To be spontaneous; flexible; adap- 
tive; understanding; 
responsive; lose lists. 


LEAD OFF QUESTION: Given your understanding of your personality type, the 
readings, and lecture material, how do you believe you can use this knowledge 
to decrease conflicts? 

ANTICIPATED RESPONSES; 

- Now that I know the perceptions, judgments, interests, values, needs, and 
motivational preferences of the types I can better guide the situation and 
anticipate problems; thus, avoiding conflicts. 

— Guides you toward assigning the right person to the right job. 

— Naturally, lowered conflict will result in increased productivity. 



NF Powerful people motivators 
Empathic 

Aware of others' feelings 
Powerful persuaders 
Authority in the person (s) 


NT Powerful Gonceptualizers 
System planners 
Competent and consistent 
Firm minded and fair 
Authority is in being competent 


Carry/rescue everybody 
Guilt ridden 

Avoid conflict, "bullet biting" 

Grudge carriers 

Flounder when person (s) fails 


Mental gymnastics/game players 
Can miss immediate 
Complex and theoretical -- 
cannot give a simple answer 
Impersonal and aloof 
They determine and define 
"competency" 


SJ Powerful Administrators 
Precise 
Take charge 

Hold subordinates/system 
accountable -- Don't reward 
what's expected 
Authority is in organization/ 
system 


Nit pickers 
Rigid 

Do the wrong thing 
Only critical of wrong 
See the negative, not the positive 
Upward accountability--"The 
boss or system made me do it" 


SP Powerful problem solvers 
Practical 

Immediate/resourceful 
Quick starters 
Authority is in the moment 


Can create problems when none 
to solve 

Low Interest beyond practical 
Get bored easily 
Low follow through 
Vague definition of authority 

Thinking types tend to be particularly effective in jobs dealing with 
inanimate objects that can be depended upon to tehave logically, and feeling 
types tend to be good at dealing with people, who can usually be depended 
on to behave otherwise than logically. Sensing types with the judging 
attitude function well and contentedly in structured jobs with sharply 
defined procedures that must be followed. Intuitives with the perceptive 
attitude chafe at jobs where they can take no initiative in pursuing the 
possibilities they perceive. 

Any team, therefore, should include a sufficient variety of types to 
perform effectively, and with satisfaction, the responsibilities of the 
team. 


Cooperation between opposite types, however, can run into difficulties, 
because they so often disagree on what should be done, or how, or whether 
anything needs to be done at all. Such disagreements are only natural. 
Opposite kinds of perception make people see quite different aspects of a 
situation. And opposite kinds of judgment direct action toward quite 
different ends. If the disagreements go unresolved, they can damage team 
morale and effectiveness. Forceful members of the team are likely to be 
and remain positive that they are right, and less forceful members may 
resent being overruled. 


Morale and effectiveness will survive intact if the members of the 
team recognize that both kinds of perception and both kinds of judgment 
are essential to a sound solution of a problem. The prescription for an 
individual solving a problem alone is to exercise all four processes in 
succession: sensing to establish all the facts, intuition to suggest 
all the various possible solutions, thinking to determine the probable 
consequences of each course of action, feeling to weigh the desirability 
of each outcome in human terms. An individual is handicapped in doing 
this, because his less-liked perception and judgment are relatively 
immature and therefore not as helpful as they might be. But a well- 
balanced team can and should contain at least one skilled representative 
of each process. 


By considering the contribution of each member, the team, or its 
executive head, can arrive at a n jre fully informed decision than would 
otherwise be possible. As a further aid to cooperation, these contribu¬ 
tions demonstrate that each member is not only weak where others are 
strong (as they may have thought all along) but are also strong where 
those others are weak (which may never have occurred to them.) A healthy 
respect for one's opposite makes for peaceful and effective co-existence. 
It also helps one recognize and cultivate one's own less-developed 
processes. 