There is no country in the world where the "study of character" is more
indulged in than in the United States of America. During my many visits
there I could not help remarking how even the "hardest headed" business
men used any form of this study that they could get hold of to help them
in their business dealings with other men and also in endeavouring to
ascertain the character of their clerks and employees.

In looking over the records of my career I find that in the course of my
visits to America I gave private lessons to the heads of two hundred and
seventy business establishments in New York, one hundred and thirty-five
in Boston, and three hundred and forty-two in Chicago.

All these men were large employers of labour and what they principally
wanted was, to have some help beyond that of their own judgment in
dealing with those with whom they came in contact in the regular course
of their business careers. In no other country did I find the same
interest taken in the study of character from a practical standpoint.

Everyone knows that "the face can wear a mask," that a person may be a good actor and put on a certain expression that may deceive even the best judgment.

But hands cannot change as the result of a mere effort to please; *the character they express is the real nature of the individual* --the true character that has been formed by heredity or that has grown up with the person by long years of habit.

Observe the fingers. If they look short and stumpy in proportion to the
rest of the palm--one may be sure that the individual to whom they belong
is of an animal nature, possessing coarse instincts, devoid of real
intellectuality, and belonging to the lower order of humanity.

If the fingers and the palm appear equal in length, the owner belongs to
a more cultured race. He has inherited from a more intellectual line of
ancestors and for all work requiring intelligence and a higher mentality
he or she could be depended on, whereas the first-mentioned type could
not--no matter how well he might talk or advocate his own superiority.

If the fingers look unusually long and thin, and in this way out of
proportion to the palm, the man or woman will err on the side of too much
ideality and refinement and is not suited to business or work requiring
"level headedness" and practicality. It would be useless, for example, to
put such a person in charge of work-people or over work-rooms. His
ideality and refinement would be thrown away in such positions, and even
with the best will in the world he would be completely out of harmony
with his surroundings.

Such a man, however, could be depended upon in all positions requiring
personal mental work, research, science, literature, philosophy,
educational work or, in fact, anything relating to the higher qualities
of the mind.

The first finger is considered as the Dictator, the Lawgiver, the finger
of Ambition, the Indicator, the Pointer, etc.

If this finger is unusually long and nearly equals the second, all these
tendencies are extremely pronounced.

Therefore, if your employee has this finger long, you can safely entrust
him with control over, and charge of others. You will be amazed how well
he or she will make rules and regulations and see that they are obeyed;
but beware, Mr. Employer, lest your first finger is short in proportion
as that of your employee is long, for, if such be the case, you too will
have "to toe the line" and you may find yourself in a very disagreeable
position.

But let me give you a further warning: Should this man or woman have a
first finger that is long and crooked, you will assuredly find out to
your cost that the personal ambitions of such an individual are
"crooked." Such an employee would be perfectly unscrupulous in finding
out your secrets and getting you into his power.

The detection of criminals by taking impressions of the tips of the
fingers and by thumb marks is now used by the police of almost every
country, and thousands of criminals have been tracked down and identified
by this means.

To-day, at Scotland Yard, is to be seen almost an entire library now
devoted to books on this side of the subject and to the collections that
the police have made, and yet, in my short time, I remember how the idea
was scoffed at when Monsieur Bertillon and the French police first
commenced the detection of criminals by this method. If the ignorant
prejudice against a complete study of the hand were overcome, the police
would be greatly assisted by studying the lines of the palm, and
acquiring a knowledge of what these lines mean, especially as regards
mentality and the inclination of the brain in one direction or another.

This study of hands can be traced back to the very earliest, most
enlightened forms of civilisation. It has been practised by the greatest
minds in all those civilisations, minds that have left their mental
philosophies and their monuments for us to marvel at. India, China,
Persia, Egypt, Rome--all in their study of mankind have placed the
greatest store in their study of the hand.

During my stay in India, I was permitted by some Brahmans (descendants of
the Joshi Caste, famous from time immemorial for their knowledge in
occult subjects) with whom it was my good fortune to become intimately
acquainted, to examine and make extracts from an extraordinary book on
this subject which they regarded as almost sacred, and which belonged to
the great past of the now despised Hindustan.

As the wisdom of the Hindus spread far and wide across the earth, so the
theories and ideas about this study spread and were practised in other
countries. Similar to the way in which religion suits itself to the
conditions of the country in which it is propagated, so has it divided
itself into various systems. It is, however, to the days of the Greek
civilisation that we owe the present clear and lucid form of the study.

This brings us down to the period when the power of the Church was
beginning to be felt outside the domain and jurisdiction of religion. It
is said that the early Fathers were jealous of the influence of this
old-world science. Whether this be true or not, we find that it was
bitterly denounced and persecuted by the early Church. It has always
been, that the history of any dominant creed or sect is the history of
opposition to knowledge, unless that knowledge come through it. This
study, therefore, the offspring of "pagans and heathens," was not even
given a trial. It was denounced as sorcery and witchcraft; the devil was
conjured up as the father of all such students, and the result was that
through this bitter persecution, the study was outlawed, and fell into
the hands of vagrants, tramps, and gipsies.

In examining this subject it will be found that in the study of mankind
it came to be recognised that, as there was a natural position on the
face for the nose, eyes, lips, etc., so also on the hand was there a
natural position for what is known as the Line of Head, Line of Life, and
so on. If these were found in some unnatural position they would equally
be the indications of unnatural tendencies. It doubtless took years of
study to name these lines and marks, but it must be remembered that this
curious study is more ancient than any other in the world.

In the original Hebrew of the Book of Job (chap. xxxvii., ver. 7), we
find these significant words: "God caused signs or seals on the hands of
all the sons of men, that the sons of men might know their works."

As the student of anatomy can build up the entire system from the
examination of a single bone, so may a person by a careful study of an
important member of the body such as the hand, apart from anything
superstitious or even mystical, build up the entire action of the system
and trace every effect back to its cause.

THE LINE OF HEAD

In all my work I regard the Line of Head or the Line of
Mentality as the most important sign that can be found in the hand.

A Line of Head is like the needle in the compass, without a true
knowledge of which it is impossible to grasp the "direction of the
subject." I have seen more mistakes caused by a lack of grasp of this
point than by anything else.

The Line of Head (page 11), or indication of the Mentality of the
subject, must in all cases be considered as the most important line on
the hand. The greatest attention should be paid to it, so as to obtain a
clear grasp of the Mentality under consideration.

The two hands must be carefully compared--the left showing the inherited
tendencies, the right the developed or cultivated qualities. The
slightest change or deviation in the markings from the left to the right
should be carefully noted down or remembered.

The direction or the termination or end of the line should, above all, be
distinctly noted, for the all-important reason that this shows the
direction that the Mentality is inclined to develop towards. For example,
if found with the end of the line sloping downwards in the left hand, and
having become straight or lying across the palm in the right--the student
is safe in concluding that the subject has not been able to follow his
natural bent, but by the force of circumstances has been obliged to make
himself more practical, to study business methods, and to have undertaken
a training towards practicality and level-headedness in order to rise
equal to the circumstances that he found himself forced to meet.

In this way the student obtains an insight into the earlier conditions of
the life under examination that is invaluable, especially when there is,
as will be found in many cases, no Line of Destiny visible in the early
years.

It will thus be seen that by observation the student will be enabled to
class the sort of life led by the person under examination. No matter how
intellectual a man or woman may look, the lines on the hand will indicate
whether or not they have developed their intellectuality. In this way it
will be seen that a study of the hand becomes a far more accurate guide
than the study of the face. Many men and women may have handsome,
intellectual faces and yet prefer sport or outdoor life to any mental
pursuit or exercise.

Those people with the Line of Head "open" and ascending slightly upwards
towards or on to the Mental Mount of Mars (3-3, Plate III.), are
self-appointed leaders, organizers of any public movement. They will
sacrifice everything, home, affection, and all ties for what they believe
is their public duty in connection with the work that they have
undertaken.

The Line of Head very open and separate from the Line of Life denotes a
character with too little caution or sensitiveness (4-4, Plate III.). The
subject will go to the opposite extreme of him with the Line of Head and
Line of Life joined. When the space is very wide it denotes excessive
impetuosity and lack of continuity of purpose, a person who pushes
himself forward on all occasions, a great desire for notoriety and one
continually changing his plans as far as the world is concerned. When
this line is excessively open or separate from the Line of Life, the
brain seems to be an extremely excitable one. The subject suffers greatly
from excessive blood to the head, mental hysteria, sleeplessness, and all
things that affect the brain. If the Line of Head is badly formed with
islands, or a broad line with breaks and hair lines (1-1, Plate IV.), it
is just as much a mark of another form of insanity as the Line of Head
curving downwards at the wrist, but with the line mentioned the type is
inclined to be morbid with a tendency to suicide.

This other Line of Head with islands indicates the character that will be
more likely to be excitable and fly into a temper and kill other people.
A Line of Head not too widely separated and either one end of it
commencing on the Mount of Jupiter, or with its main branch from the
Mount of Jupiter (4-4, Plate III.), is one of the most brilliant marks of
all.

THE LINE OF HEAD AND ITS SECONDARY SIGNS

On the Line of Head when found in the form of a continuous chain (1-1,
Plate IV.), all through the line, they denote mental weakness, but
generally produced by ill-health which more immediately affects the
brain.

Such mental weakness or "brain illness," if found with nails showing very
small "moons" or none at all, denotes an anaemic condition of the blood
that affects the brain, a low condition of vitality and bad circulation,
which seems to starve the brain of blood and prevents such people from
making any continuous effort in regard to study or will power, and causes
them to act in an erratic fashion.

When the Line of Head is widely separated from the Line of Life, then
this chain formation of islands is still more accentuated and more
difficult to cure. Such subjects have periods of mental excitability
which it seems impossible for them to control, and in such moments they
are liable to fly off at a tangent and commit mad or rash acts, but acts
generally dangerous to other people.

When, however, the Line of Head is very sloping (2-2, Plate IV.), with
this formation of islands the subject is inclined to have fits of
depression and melancholy, during which he is likely to shrink away from
people or make an attempt against his own life. "Suicide while
temporarily insane" is the verdict of the jury in such cases.

Another important point of consideration in relation to the islands in
the Line of Head, is to note their position on the line itself, or under
what finger they make their appearance. When these islands are found at
the commencement of the line under the first finger or Mount of Jupiter
(3, Plate IV.), it will be found that the subject in early life was
delicate mentally, and displayed no energy of will; no desire to study,
was listless and without ambition.

Under the second finger on the Mount of Saturn (4, Plate IV.), the
subject, on the contrary, is inclined to suffer from severe headaches,
morbidness, melancholy, and a tendency for inflammation, especially at
the base of the head.

Under the third finger, the Mount of Sun (5, Plate IV.), an island shows
a very curious fact, namely that the person is inclined to suffer from
weakness of the eyes and short-sight. If many of these islands are marked
it generally foreshadows a still greater tendency to blindness and
weakness of the sight.

Islands under the fourth finger, the Mount of Mercury (6, Plate IV.), and
the extremity of the Head Line denote weakness of the brain in old age,
and a highly nervous worrying disposition. If very badly marked they
denote that in the latter part of life the subject may be disposed to
insanity proceeding from a worrying disposition, and often from the
overstraining of the mental faculties. It will thus be seen that every
portion of this remarkable line may be divided into sections to obtain
marvellous detail in making predictions for the future.
