From the earliest times, the practised chironomist is supposed to have been able to detect the leading peculiarities of character in the lineaments of the palm. Indeed, his knowledge of what the passions are capable of suggesting, has enabled him to prognosticate as possible, certain results, which, when they have actually arisen, have been accepted as proofs of prophetic wisdom by the imaginative and the credulous.
It may, however, be stated generally, that man is born into the world with inherent qualities which are placed under the dominion of the will, and which are capable of leading to happiness or misery, according as that will is exercised. If this be so, it would appear to be one of the first and most imperative of man’s duties, to make himself acquainted with those definite, inexorable, physical and moral laws, which an all-wise Creator has supplied for his guidance, that he may secure himself against the penalty attached to disobedience or neglect—for Nature makes no distinction between wilfulness and ignorance.
In seeking to remedy any physical evil, the first step is to discover the cause of such evil. It is the same with moral evil. Many men, like Dr. Andrew Combe, Dr. Henry Davidson, and Dr. Portal, have, by an intimate knowledge of their constitutions, been enabled to prolong life beyond the average term allotted to man. Portal is said to have reached the advanced age of 80, although born with a marked tendency to consumption. But if so much may be accomplished when disease has already declared itself, what may not be hoped for when the process of amelioration and change is commenced in early life,when all is flexible, tender, and plastic?
The first proceeds from the outer edge of the palm, and inclining upwards, terminates either at the root of the first finger (Jupiter), or the root of the second finger (Saturn). It is denominated the line of the heart.
The Line of the Heart, when it presents a uniform and healthy appearance, indicates an affectionate and happy nature—the force or feebleness of attachment being represented by the length of the line. If, for example, it is found to cross the whole palm, Horn the outer edge of the percussion to the extremity of the root of the first finger, it marks an excess of tenderness, and, as a consequence, disorder of the affections; which, though some-times productive of exquisite happiness, involves also inevitable suffering; for excess of affection is often one of the strongest elements in the passion of jealousy.
A hand destitute of the line of the heart is not only devoid of all sympathy, but is indicative of bad faith, aptitude for evil, and premature death.
The second line takes its rise at the base of the root of the first finger, and, passing directly across the palm, or diagonally downwards, terminates either in the percussion (mound of Mars), or in that of the Moon. This is called the line of the head.
The line of the head when direct and fully developed indicates sound judgment and a lucid understanding. It passes through the struggles of life without shrinking and with- out fear. These qualities will, however, be much modified if the percussion portion of the palm (mount of Mars) is little developed. They will, on the other hand, be increased if that part be large.
Should the line of the head, after having traversed the centre of the palm, descend to the lower outer corner of the hand (the mount of the Moon), the judgment in worldly matters will be less strong, life will be regarded from an artistic point of view, and reason will be disturbed by chimeras.
When it extends to the middle of the hand only, it marks feebleness of will, indecision. If it takes the form of a chain, there will be want of power to fix the ideas (see tracing 6, Idiot’s hand). If pale or colourless, there will be want of strength to carry out the ideas of the mind. If arrested by a short defined line, like a bar, it indicates injury to the head or throat. Should round knots appear on the line of the head, they are supposed to indicate a tendency to homicide.
When the line of the head has its termination at the root of the middle finger(Saturn), and if the line of the heart he less strongly pronounced, the suggestions of the head will he mistaken for those of the heart. Such organization is also indicative of struggles, followed hy vexations or misfortunes, the result of obstinacy or false calculation. When in one hand the line of the head is broken into two parts, there is the indication of derangement, amounting to monomania but should the line in the other hand be well formed, the danger will be greatly diminished. If a cross be found in the middle of the line of the head, it is supposed to indicate sudden death or fatal wounds. If a well-marked line proceed directlyfrom the line of the head to the little finger (Mercury), it is supposed to indicate commercial success. If it terminates between the ring and the little finger, it indicates success in art enlightened by science.
Line of Life.“If this line be well and clearly defined, and is of a vivid colour,” says Torreblanca,“ without being intermitted, or puncturis infecta, it denotes the good complexion and virtue of its members, according to Aristotle.” “ When well formed,” says M. Desbarrolles,“ of a soft colour, and bounding entirely the root of the thumb, it indicates a long and happy life, exempt from any serious maladies.”
When large and deeply coloured, violence, brutality. Whenlivid, with red spots, passion, amounting to fury. When the line seems to have its origin in the root of the index finger (Jupiter), it becomes the index of ambition—of the whole life being directed to the gratification of pride, with the probability of success, honours, ribbons, decorations, high position. When cut by a multitude of small lines, it is the indication of numerous maladies. When it joins the line of the head and the heart, it is the indication of misfortune. Life is imperiled when the head and heart are governed and controlled by the blind operation of the vital instinct.
Hepatic Line, or Line of the Liver.—This line takes its rise sometimes from the wrist, sometimes from the line of life, and sometimes from the centre of the palm. If it proceeds from the wrist directly to the root of the little finger (mound of Mercury), well defined, and of a good colour, it indicates sound health, harmony in the fluids, rich blood, excellent memory, good conscience, success in business. If undulating and tortuous, it is indicative of biliary derangements, and doubtful probity.
Ring of Venus.—This is a line which takes its rise between the fore and middle finger, and, forming a semicircle, it is lost between the ring and little finger. This line, when strongly marked, is the index of licentiousness without restraint. If broken, and the divided portions superposed one over the other, it is indicative of the most depraved passion.

If double, triple, irregularly traced but broken, it is indicative of shameless obscenity, and if those lines be very deeply traced, there will be impurity carried to its utmost limits.  Should this line extend to the root of the little finger, it still indicates licentiousness, to gratify which, craft, cunning, lying-, and robbery will be resorted to.  If, in place of forming a semicircle, the line pass on to the outer edge of the palm (to the mound of Mercury), it indicates that passion is better directed, and that the qualities attributed to that portion of the palm are augmented in force and energy.

Small lines proceeding from the principal lines are called Branches. They indicate exuberance in the qualities attributed to the principal lines from which they emanate, and are usually found at the commencement and termination of those lines. For example, those proceeding from the line of the heart indicate warmth and devotion ; those from the line of the head, superior intelligence ; from the line of life, superabundant vigour and health ; from the line of Saturn, happiness complete.

...When many such lines appear on a mound, there is the indication of so great a superabundance of the qualities attributed to the mound as to impede its direct and legitimate function. Many lines and furrows, for example, on the mound of the Moon, indicate presentiments, prophetic dreams, and sometimes visions.

He whose hand is covered with small lines will exhibit constant agitation, though all around may be calm and peaceful. As the leaves and flowers are Letted by the stilly breeze, which is far too feeble to stir the trees, so is he influenced whose hand is thus constituted ; —like the poplar or the aspen, every breath disturbs him.

The angles at the base are formed by the hepatic line, with the line of life, and with the extremity of the line of the head.  The angle of the vertex, when acute and distinctly formed, is the index of a good disposition, delicacy of mind, and a superior nature.  If obtuse, it is the index of insensibility and dulness. Should this angle be formed by the line of Saturn and that of the head, in place of the line of life, it is indicative of a miserable existence, tormented by avaricious desires, and, according to tradition, destined to incapacity.
